# AN0002: Understanding Tiltmeter Count Readings

Many of our tiltmeter and inclination instruments report their readings as
“counts” which is an often confusing term. Counts refers to the raw output of
the analog to digital converter in the system and is the lowest level form of
the measurement. This reading is provided as it allows ultimate versatility in
processing because you always begin with data is the purest form. Some
instruments, generally our lower resolution MEMS based instruments, will also
provide an output in degrees or microradians which uses the stock nominal
calibration of the instrument. If you wish to apply an instrument specific
calibration or perform other corrections, starting with the raw count reading is
best.

Counts are always an integer number and represent the voltage output of the
sensor as measured by the analog to digital converter. High resolution
converters have a wider range of counts that they can divide the measurement
range into. For example a 16-bit ADC can output the numbers 0 - 65,535 while a
24-bit ADC can output 0 - 16,777,216.

Your instrument will have an expected or nominal calibration that is the
mathematical ideal calibration for a perfect instrument. For example, a MEMS
inclinometer may have an expected calibration of 0.00179 degrees/count.
Therefore if the output of the instrument is 16,435 counts we can convert to
degrees by multiplying. We obtain a result of 29.41865 degrees.

<center>
  <pre>
    Angle = Counts x Calibration
  </pre>
</center>

If your instrument had a full custom calibration or you have performed a
calibration you may have a different number to use other than the nominal. The
new calibration should be close to the ideal or there may be a problem with the
instrument or calibration method. A MEMS calibrated once installed in its casing
and operating at a temperature for performance in a geothermal well may have a
calibration of 0.00182 degrees/count instead of the 0.00179 degrees per count
nominal for example. It is very likely that the calibration factor is a function
of temperature and depending upon the application this may need to be
considered.

Using raw counts also allows you to fully document every step of the analysis
process - from what calibration was used to any temperature, cross axis, bias,
or other corrections are performed on the data. Be sure to check out our website
for application notes on those corrections and ways to further improve the
performance of your tiltmeter.
